# Singing of the Guildpact
The Guildpact was created on the [[plane]] of [[Ravnica]] after a long war led by the opposing [[Cisarzim]] and [[Razia]]. [[Ravnican guilds]] divided duties across nine guilds for the betterment of the plane as a whole. Following this, Ravnica began its long evolution into a predominantly urban plane.

The Guildpact itself was focused upon an ancient, primeval living document signed with blood and magic by each of the [[Parun|paruns]] to represent their willingness to work together to hold the city together. It was signed in -5517 AR, a year which became known as 0 ZC. The first draft of the Guildpact, pressed under three inches of magic-treated glass and authored by [[Azor I|Azor]] himself, is still preserved in the [[Old Laws Library]] of the [[Azorius Senate|Azorius]] [[Azorius Senate#The Jelenn Column|Jelenn Column]] complex. Its second signatory was the Boros parun [[Razia]], followed by the [[Golgari Swarm|Golgari]] parun [[Svogthir]].

The [[Parun|paruns]] were the founders of the ten [[Ravnican guilds]] and signatories of the original Guildpact. As most were exceptionally long-lived beings, a majority remained active in some form after ten millennia, though not all continued as guildmaster of their respective guild.

The annual celebration of the Guildpact begins on 28 Zuun and extends overnight into 1 Seleszeni.
# Decamillennial Celebration
During the Decamillennial Celebration of 10,000 ZC, commemorating a monumental anniversary of the Guildpact's signing, the pact was broken, the ancient balance was shattered, and Ravnica was thrown into chaos. It didn't take long for wealthy power-mongers to begin seizing control of elements in the city, turning the guilds to their service instead of the other way around. Eventually, the ten-thousand-year-old guild culture and division of duties reasserted itself. The ten [[Ravnican guilds|guilds]] regained their dominant positions, but without the magically binding force of the Guildpact to maintain the balance among them.

Years later, in 10,075 ZC, the [[Niv-Mizzet|Izzet guildmaster]] discovered that [[Azor I|Azor]], founder of the [[Azorius Senate]], had created a contingency plan that would take effect if the magic of the Guildpact were ever broken. An intricate network of ley lines sprawling across the districts of [[Ravnica]], called the Implicit Maze, offered a test to the guilds: if they could cooperate to solve the maze, they would secure the power of a new Guildpact. That power was eventually bestowed—incarnated, actually—in the person of [[Jace Beleren]], who became the Living Guildpact. His word became the binding law of Ravnica. Any law he verbally confirmed became magically unbreakable, and the responsibility of keeping the guilds in balance fell to him.