The [[Ravnican guilds|guilds]] might be considered the heart and soul of [[Ravnica]], but they aren't all that makes up the city. Many citizens choose not to join a guild—some because they can't be bothered, and others because they have philosophical objections to the very idea of guilds. The so-called guildless are especially common in areas that might be considered rural: places farther from the heart of the city and the larger exurban districts. But even in the city's heart, some guildless citizens actively oppose the influence of the guilds, blaming the world's strife and suffering on an elite hierarchy that seeks to take control, consolidate wealth, and fragment a populace against itself. 
The numbers of the guildless include people engaged in a wide variety of trades and services that aren't managed and regulated by the guilds, from baking to cartography. University professors, guides, traders, and bartenders might be guildless. Criminal gangs set themselves up as rivals to the [[Orzhov Syndicate|Orzhov]], and even military forces operate independent of guild control, serving as neighborhood police forces or mercenaries for hire. 
About half of Ravnica's population is guildless. That proportion is higher for some races than others: nearly all [[Elf|elves]], for example, belong to the [[Golgari Swarm|Golgari]], [[Selesnya Conclave|Selesnya]], or [[Simic Combine|Simic]] guilds, but a majority of [[Goblin|goblins]] are guildless. [[Loxodon|Loxodons]] tend to have a strong sense of community, so they readily join guilds. And when they don't, they join groups of another sort, such as mercenary companies or cults. [[Simic hybrid|Simic hybrids]] are all created within the [[Simic Combine]], so it's rare for them not to be part of it.